---
title: 'pyrexMD: Workflow-Orientated Python Package for Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics'
tags:
  - Python
  - Gromacs
  - physics
  - biology
  - replica exchange
  - molecular dynamics
  - contact bias
authors:
  - name: Arthur Voronin
    orcid: 0000-0002-5804-5151
    affiliation: "1, 2" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Alexander Schug^[al.schug\@fz-juelich.de]
    orcid: 0000-0002-0534-502X
    affiliation: "3, 4" # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
affiliations:
 - name: Steinbuch Centre for Computing, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany
   index: 1
 - name: Department of Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
   index: 2
 - name: Institute for Advanced Simulation, Jülich Supercomputing Center, Jülich, Germany
   index: 3
 - name: Faculty of Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg, Germany
   index: 4
date: 10 May 2021
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

Proteins are complex biomolecules which fulfill a wide range of critical tasks
in living organisms. Studying and understanding their structure, function, and
dynamics is essential for life sciences and can be applied for, e.g., disease
control or advanced drug design. Molecular dynamics (MD) is a computational
method relying on physical models to simulate biomolecular systems. Movements of
all atoms can be 'viewed' like a movie and analyzed to improve the understanding
of specific interactions or complement experimental measurements. Replica
Exchange (REX) is a powerful method used to enhance the sampling of protein
conformations and generates large amounts of data.

`pyrexMD` is designed as an interactive 'all-purpose' toolkit for research
projects which rely on (contact-guided) Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics
using `GROMACS`. Due to its workflow-orientated design, it is possible to
rapidly create whole setup or analysis workflows, thereby significantly
enhancing productivity and reducing the time spent at various stages of the
project.


# Theoretical background

Timescales of various biomolecular interactions of interest, such as protein
folding, conformation transitions, or ligand binding, are typically in the order
of µs to s. MD simulations, however, operate in 1-2 fs steps, which makes
in-silico studies of proteins computationally demanding. Besides, observations
of native configurations during MD simulations are often not guaranteed and
proteins can become trapped in certain conformations. One possibility to
overcome this problem is to utilize an enhanced sampling technique such as REX
[@sugita1999replica; @zhang2005convergence]. REX simulates N non-interacting
copies (“replicas”) of a system at different temperatures T$_i$. At certain time
intervals adjacent replicas can be exchanged which leads to a walk in
temperature space. REX is therefore suited to obtain physically meaningful
structure ensembles at specific temperatures. Based on the chosen temperature
range and distribution is is also possible to obtain native-like conformations
within a single run. Depending on the research goal, it is beneficial to
integrate additional theoretically [@morcos2011direct] or experimentally derived
[@perilla2017cryoem] biases into REX simulations to restrict the sampling space
and thus effectively lower computational costs.


# Statement of need

In particular analyzing research studies relying on REX can become quite arduous
and time consuming. REX simulations usually not only require knowledge of
various program tools but also consist of many individual steps ranging from
simulation setup and pre-processing over testing and simulation-monitoring to
post-processing and data analyses. Furthermore, REX can generate terabytes of
data and requires in particular a systematic handling of I/O.

One of the most used software packages for MD is `Gromacs` [@van2005gromacs],
a free open source solution enabling the user to choose from many different
force fields such as  GROMOS [@schmid2011definition], AMBER
[@wang2004development], CHARMM [@mackerell2000development], or OPLS
[@jorgensen1996development]. The core functionality of `Gromacs` can be extended
by plug-ins such as `PLUMED` [@bonomi2009plumed; @tribello2014plumed] or
`SSAGES` [@sidky2018ssages]. They implement additional algorithms and enhanced
sampling methods which interact during the MD simulation itself or can give
access to user-defined collective variables enabling new types of analyses.

`pyrexMD` on the other hand focuses on improvements during the simulation setup
or post-simulation analyses. It provides efficient and robust methods for
setting up optimized (contact-guided) MD or REX MD simulations. Furthermore it
offers many different structure analysis and comparison functions to explore the
large I/O sets generated by REX. `pyrexMD` is designed as an interactive
'all-purpose' toolkit which should be used in jupyter notebooks. The provided
functions primarily combine many individual steps into workflow-orientated
functions which simplify and partially automate large tasks. This allows the
user to rapidly create whole setups or analysis workflows by using just a few
commands which greatly increases the productivity and reduces the time spent at
various stages of the project. Examples of currently available functions include:

- set up systems for normal MD or REX MD simulations
- integration of bias contacts and bias potentials
- topology comparison and consistency checks across different systems or replicas
- trajectory viewer and interactive plots
- wide range of analyses functions related to structure comparison (e.g. contact
maps, Qvalues, global distance test, local accuracy, dihedrals, cluster
analyses, etc.)
- functions that calculate meaningful measurements such as RMSD, Qvalues, etc. are
coupled to plot or logging functions

`pyrexMD` efficiently integrates and extends the following popular MD-related
python packages:

- `MDAnalysis` [@oliver_beckstein-proc-scipy-2016; @michaud2011mdanalysis],
- `nglview` [@nguyen2018nglview],
- `GromacsWrapper` [@oliver_beckstein_2019_2654393].

By covering various important aspects, `pyrexMD` allows to execute the whole project
from start to finish without switching to other programs which unnecessarily
interrupts the workflow and often requires know-how of different command line
syntaxes. Alongside the workflow-orientated functions, it also adds a variety of
useful general functions and quality of life improvements, such as an integrated trajectory
viewer, interactive figures linked to a trajectory or creation of multi-panel
figures from saved .pickle files. With `pyrexMD`, it becomes especially easy to
create, share and reproduce research results or transfer the work on other
target structures of interest. Furthermore, it lowers the technical boundaries
for newcomers who want to do research utilizing REX for enhanced sampling.

# Example applications

`pyrexMD` was initially developed during the work of [@voronin2020including]. It
is currently applied in ongoing REX studies about protein and RNA structure
refinement.

Fig. 1 exemplarily shows the application of the trajectory viewer with an
interactive plot. Fig. 2 displays a true positive rate analysis of predicted
bias contacts based on the number of ranked contacts. Fig. 3 shows the local
accuracy of conformations based on a global distance test for models generated
during a REX study.

![Trajectory viewer on top which is linked to the interactive plot (here RMSD)
at the bottom. It is possible to quickly inspect conformations at specific values by
interacting with the graph itself (e.g. via ctrl-click) in order to get
additional valueable information accessible through the trajectory
viewer.](paper_figs/fig1.png){ width=85% }

![Analysis of the true positive rate (TPR) for bias contacts using `pyrexMD`.
The figure shows the TPR of considered bias contacts in addition to other
relevant value guidelines according to [@voronin2020including] such as a minimal
TPR threshold of 75% in red and a suggested optimal number of contacts in orange
between L/2 and L contacts, vizualized by the orange
region.](paper_figs/fig2.png){ width=82% }

![Local accuracy of REX-generated models based on global distance test scores.
The figure gives a clear representation of how good each part of the model is
refined compared to a reference structure. Each residue is color-coded to
represent the CA-CA distance between the model and reference structure after
fitting. Corresponding global distance test scores are shown on the left
side.](paper_figs/fig3.png){ width=82% }

# Availability

`pyrexMD` can be downloaded from
[https://github.com/KIT-MBS/pyrexMD](https://github.com/KIT-MBS/pyrexMD) under the
MIT license. Both online documentation and quick guide can be accessed via
[https://kit-mbs.github.io/pyrexMD](https://kit-mbs.github.io/pyrexMD)


# Acknowledgments

We want to thank all developers and contributors of MDAnalysis as the
backbone of pyrexMD allowing us to parse and analyze MD-related data files.

This work is supported by the Helmholtz Association Initiative and Networking
Fund under project number ZT-I-0003.

# References
